---
title: 'The Road to Homological Algebra'
date: 2020-08-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - Homological Algebra
  - Category Theory
---

I came across Homological Algebra like I think most do, which is as Simplicial Homology in Hatcher's Algebraic Topology. This becomes axiomatized in Hatcher a few sections later, but it certainly does not present homology in its full generality. Namely, in what types of categories can we construct a homology theory? I will address this in this blog post by exploring the progression of the structure on a category required to formulate a Homology Theory. One of the best resources on the field of Homological Algebra is a text by WEIBEL, which I will refer to as necessary.

(Ab-)Enriched Categories
======

Most working mathematicians assume their categories are such that the collection of morphisms between objects forms a set. However, consider \\(\textbf{Vect}\_{k}\\), the category whose objects are \\(k\\)-vector spaces and morphisms are \\(k\\)-linear maps. Then one may in fact imbue \\(\text{Hom}\_{\textbf{Vect}\_{k}}(V,W)\\) with the structure of a \\(k\\)-vector space by the natural pointwise addition and scalar multiplication. This holds more generally in the category \\(R-\text{mod}\\) of left \\(R\\)-modules with \\(R\\)-linear maps where \\(R\\) is some ring. These are all instances of enriched categories.

Suppose \\((\mathcal{C},\otimes,\mathbb{1}, \alpha,\lambda,\rho)\\) is a monoidal category. Then a \\(\mathcal{C}\\)-enriched category \\(\mathcal{A}\\) consists of the following datum
\begin{equation\*}
   \\left(\text{Obj}(\mathcal{A}), \\{C(a,b), \circ\_{a,b,c}, j\_{a}\\}\_{a,b,c\in\text{Obj}(\mathcal{A})}\\right)
\end{equation\*}
where \\(\text{Obj}(\mathcal{A})\\) is the set of objects, \\(C(a,b)\\) is in an object of \\(\mathcal{C}\\), and \\(\circ\_{a,b,c}, j\_{a}\\) are maps

\begin{equation\*}
   \circ_{a,b,c}: C(b,c)\otimes C(a,b) \\rightarrow C(a,c),\newline
   j_{a}: 1 \\rightarrow C(a,a)
\end{equation\*}

which make the following diagrams commute.
