---
title: 'Blog Post number 2'
date: 2013-08-14
permalink: /posts/2013/08/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---


One of my favorite parts about Category Theory is its generalization of commonly seen structures or interactions, and then being able to witness similar behavior in surprisingly different context. This blog post pertains to one particular categorification I like, and that is the notion of a monoid object and module objects with respect to a monoid object. 

As the name suggests, one looks at a categorification of a monoid, which is just a group with no inverses or a semigroup with an identity; it depends on how you see the glass of water I suppose. Consequently, we have a set with a unital, associative, binary product. Like most things in category theory, the general construction we are aiming for can be obtained if you consider what the structure is in terms of maps; after all, categories are all about morphisms!

If we denote a monoid by \\(M\\), then the fact that there is a binary operation means there is a set-map

\begin{equation}
    \mu:M\times M\to M
\end{equation}

That the operation is associative means the following diagram commutes



Where \\(\alpha\_{M,M,M}\\) is the canonical isomorphism between direct product of sets. The fact that the operation is unital means that there is a two-sided identity element with respect to the operation. Now, recall the one-element set \\(\mathbb{1} := \\{\ast\\}\\) and the unique set-map
\begin{equation}
    \iota:\mathbb{1}\to M,\quad \ast\mapsto 1\_{M}
\end{equation}
Then the unitality of \\(\mu\\) means the following diagrams commute

where \\(\rho\_{M}: (m,\ast)\mapsto m\\) and \\(\lambda\_{M}:(\ast, m)\mapsto m\\).

Now, how can we proceed to generalize this to consider monoids in any category? Well the first thing to note is that there is a huge dependence on the categorical structure of \textbf{Set}. In particular, it was utilized that \textbf{Set} has a product and a singleton set that can embed nicely into any monoid. Moreover, there are very important morphisms that one otherwise takes for granted if the diagrams are not explicitly drawn. These are the maps \\(\alpha\_{M,M,M}, \rho\_{M},\\) and \\(\lambda\_{M}\\). Indeed, writing the definition of a monoid in terms of elements, one does not really acknowledge the presence of these "structural maps." However, they are the bread and butter of what it means to be a monoid! The operation being associative is captured by the compatibility of \\(\mu\\) with the associativity map, and the unitality is captured by the compatibility of \\(\mu\\) with \\(\rho\_{M}\\) and \\(\lambda\_{M}\\).

These are precisely the diagrams above, so a monoid object in \textbf{Set} is the classical monoid as we expect.

Now that we have this generalized notion of a monoid object, what are some examples in other categories? It is a fun exercise to verify the following instances of monoid objects:
\begin{itemize}
    \item In \textbf{Ab}, a monoid object is an associative, unital ring.
    
    \item In \\(R\\)-\textbf{mod}, a monoid object is an associative, unital \\(R\\)-algebra, which is consistent with the previous bullet.
    
    \item In \textbf{Mon}, the category of monoids, a monoid object is in fact a commutative monoid! Compare this to a group object in the category of groups \textbf{Grp}.
    
    \item In a category with finite coproducts, every object can be trivially made into a monoid.
    
    \item In \\(\textbf{End}\_{\textbf{Cat}}(\mathcal{C})\\), the category of endofunctors of \\(\mathcal{C}\\), a monoid object is a monad.
\end{itemize}

There are now a few things we can do, two of which are natural, and another is partially motivated by the above instances of monoid objects. The first is like with every categorical object defined via morphisms, we can equally define its dual by reversing the arrows. In particular, for a monoidal category \\(\mathcal{C}\\) as above we define a comonoid object as a triple \\((M,\Delta,\varepsilon)\\) such that the following diagrams commute


and as most dual object, a monoid object in the opposite monoidal category \\(\mathcal{C}^{\text{op}}\\) is a comonoid object in \\(\mathcal{C}\\). In the examples of monoid objects above, the corresponding comonoid objects are simply \\(R\\)-coalgebras, etc.

The other natural thing we can do is look at the category of monoid objects over a monoidal category. To do this, we first need to define what are morphisms between monoid objects. Again being motivated by the classical definition of monoid homomorphisms, which we take to fix the identity element, the natural choice of morphisms between monoid objects if as follows. Suppose \\((A,\mu\_{A},\iota\_{A})\\) and \\((B,\mu\_{B},\iota\_{B})\\) are monoid objects in \\(\mathcal{C}\\). Then a morphism \\(f\in\text{Hom}\_{\mathcal{C}}(A,B)\\) is a morphism of monoid objects if the following diagrams commute


If one considers \\(\mathcal{C} = \textbf{Set},\\) then \\(f\\) is indeed a monoid homomorphism in the aforementioned classical sense.

Now with this, one can take the subcategory \\(\textbf{Mon}\_{\mathcal{C}}\\) of \\(\mathcal{C}\\). This will not necessarily be a full subcategory because the morphisms have to satisfy the above compatibility with the monoid object maps. There is analogously the subcategory \\(\textbf{CoMon}\_{\mathcal{C}}\\) of comonoid objects of \\(\mathcal{C}\\). What is interesting is that as \\(\mathcal{C}\\) is a monoidal category, one might wonder whether either \\(\textbf{Mon}\_{\mathcal{C}}\\) or \\(\textbf{CoMon}\_{\mathcal{C}}\\) is similarly monoidal. I recommend the reader to show that the unit object is a monoid object. However, the tensor product of two monoid objects need not be a monoid object. Even if they were, it is not immediate that the associator and left- and right-unitors of the original monoidal category should be morphisms of monoid objects as well.

Interestingly enough, if we further assume we are looking at monoid objects in symmetric monoidal categories, then suddenly we may indeed show that the categories \\(\textbf{Mon}\_{\mathcal{C}}\\) and \\(\textbf{CoMon}\_{\mathcal{C}}\\) are monoidal categories! At the very least, proving that the tensor product of monoid objects is a monoid object becomes very straightforward. 

What about the third thing I mentioned one could do with monoid objects? Well, classical monoids have a representation theory, and so do the instances of monoid objects in \\(R\\)-mod. So with this, one can attempt to abstract this and define a module object for a monoid object in a monoidal category! 

As with the motivation for defining a monoid object, I will formulate the definition of a (left) module for a classical monoid in terms of diagrams, and then just replace \\(\times\\) with \\(\otimes\\) and call it a day. 

Thus, let \\((M,\mu,\iota)\\) be a monoid in the classical sense i.e. a monoid object in \textbf{Set}. Then a left \\(M\\)-module is classically a set with a set with a monoid homomorphism \\((A,\phi: M\to\text{End}\_{\textbf{Set}}(A))\\). In particular, element-wise one has

\begin{align*}
    \phi(xy)(a) & = \phi(x)(\phi(y)(a))\\
    \phi(1)(a) & = a
\end{align*}

for all \\(x,y\in M\\) and \\(a\in A\\). The above equalities are equivalent to the following diagrams being commutative



where \\(\lambda\_{A}\\) is the left unitor as before, and where \\(\Phi: (m\times a)\mapsto \phi(m)(a)\\). A subtle point is that \\(M\\) and \\(A\\) are objects of the same category! Indeed, \\((M,\mu,\iota)\\) is a monoid object over \textbf{Set}, and \\(A\\) was assumed to simply be a set as well. Thus in the categorification, we will define module objects in the same category as that of the corresponding monoid object. In particular, if \\((M,\mu,\iota)\\) is a monoid object in a monoidal category \\((\mathcal{C},\otimes,\mathbb{1},\alpha,\lambda,\rho)\\), then \\((A,\Phi)\\) is a module object for \\((M,\mu,\iota)\\) if the following diagrams commute



And as we did with monoid objects, one can similarly define the dual notion of comodule objects, and consider the corresponding category of these respective objects with their notion of morphisms. For the latter, the notion of morphism of module objects \\((A,\Phi), (B,\Psi)\\) for a common monoid object \\((M,\mu,\iota)\\) is precisely a morphism \\(f:A\to B\\) such that the following diagram commutes



Upon doing so, one finds that the module objects in examples above of monoid objects are the classical definition of modules e.g. a module object for a monoid object in \\(R\\)-\textbf{mod} is the usual notion of module for an \\(R\\)-algebra \\(A\\).

In conclusion, categorification is awesome. Seemingly different objects that are defined and motivated by different circumstances are in a sense categorically the same. Whether it is a ring, an algebra over a field or a ring, or even a monad; these objects have the same categorical structure. Moreover, each of these are typically studied by looking at their notion of modules, but even these are also the same structure categorically. However, I am not saying that the categories for which these monoid objects exist are themselves necessarily the same or similar, beyond being monoidal. For instance, the categories \textbf{Mon} and \textbf{Set} are not \textbf{Ab}-enriched, while \\(R\\)-\textbf{mod} is an abelian category.

While I am an advocate of generalizations, they certainly have their shortcomings. For instance, I highly doubt the factorization of finitely generated modules over a PID can be obtained through the lens of these categorical considerations! It would definitely be cool to see what such a categorical statement would be.









